% toki pona page 4 - oh no! more vocabulary
% /dev/urandom
% march 2020

The vocabulary for this page:

| word    | meaning                          |
|---------|----------------------------------|
| jo      | to have/carry/contain/hold       |
| kala    | fish, marine animal, sea creature|
| kasi    | plant, grass, herb, leaf         |
| pipi    | insect, bug                      |
| sitelen | symbol, image, writing, to draw  |
| toki    | speech, to talk, language        |
| waso    | bird, flying creature            |
| ma      | earth, land, outdoors, territory |
| kiwen   | hard object, metal, stone, solid |
| ko      | powder, clay, semi-solid         |

This page will only cover the ten new words and a few small concepts. 

> jan pali li telo e kasi. - The worker is watering the plants.

> jan wawa li jo e kiwen suli. - The strong person is carrying big rocks.

> telo suli li jo e kala. - The sea/ocean ("big water") has fish.

> mi sitelen e toki sina. - I'm writing down your speech.

> waso lili li moku e pipi. - The small bird eats bugs.

> ma tomo mi li suli. - My city ("housed land") is big.

And here's some sentences that use interesting phrases.

> jan pali li toki utala e tomo mi. - The worker criticizes ("talks in a
> fighting way about") my house.

> ona li toki ike e jan pona mi. - They (insult / speak bad things about) my
> friend(s).

You can put several verbs and several objects into one sentence by adding extra
particles "li" or "e" followed by their verbs or objects.

> meli li toki e soweli, e waso. - A woman is talking about land animals and
> birds.

> jan pali li pona e ilo, li lukin e lipu. - A worker fixes the device and looks
> at (reads) a document.

## Phrases

The word "toki", when used by itself, is a common greeting:

> toki! -- Hello!

## Dialectal differences

> %info%
> This part of the document describes how certain toki pona courses differ in
> explaining certain ideas.

If the subject is "mi" or "sina" (and therefore it doesn't have a particle
"li"), you can do one of two things to add an extra verb.

* The official book ("pu") suggests that you simply duplicate the sentence:

> mi pali. mi moku. - I work and eat.

* The "o kama sona e toki pona!" course instead suggests you add a second "li":

> mi pali, li moku. - I work and eat.

## Exercises

Now, try to figure out the meaning of these sentences.

* mi moku ala e soweli.
* jan pona sina li toki e ma, e telo.
* jan suli li lukin a ma tomo, li sitelen e ijo.
* ma li jo e kasi ike.
* pipi lili li suli, li pona.

And try to translate the following sentences into toki pona.

* Your city doesn't have any workers.
* My husband doesn't work, (only) eats and fights.
* My homeland ("original land") is large.
* Your painting looks good.
* My friend has fish and fruit and makes good food.

<a name="answers" href="#answers" onclick="revealSpoilers();">Reveal answers</a>

> %spoiler%
> * I don't eat animals (i.e. meat).
> * Your friend is talking about the land and the water.
> * An important person is looking at the city and writing things down.
> * The land has weeds ("bad plants").
> * Small bugs are important and good.

> %spoiler%
> * ma tomo sina li jo ala e jan pali.
> * mije mi li pali ala, li moku, li utala. 
> * ma mama mi li suli.
> * sitelen sina li pona lukin.
> * jan pona mi li jo e kala e kili li pali e moku pona.

[Previous page](3.html) [Top page](index.html) [Next page](5.html)
