% toki pona page 5 - oh no! more vocabulary
% /dev/urandom
% march 2020

The vocabulary for this page:

| word    | meaning                          | derived from                   |
|---------|----------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| jo      | to have/carry/contain/hold       | Mandarin "yǒu" (have)          |
| kala    | fish, marine animal, sea creature| Finnish "kala" (fish)          |
| kasi    | plant, grass, herb, leaf         | Finnish "kasvi" (plant)        |
| pipi    | insect, bug                      | Acadian French "bibitte" (bug) |
| sitelen | symbol, image, writing, to draw  | Dutch "schilderen" (paint)     |
| toki    | speech, to talk, language        | Tok Pisin "tok" (talk)         |
| waso    | bird, flying creature            | French "oiseau" (bird)         |
| ma      | earth, land, outdoors, territory | Finnish "maa" (earth/land)     |
| kiwen   | hard object, metal, stone, solid | Finnish "kiven" (of a stone)   |
| ko      | powder, clay, semi-solid         | Cantonese "gou" (cream/paste)  |

This page will only cover the ten new words and a few small concepts. 

> jan pali li telo e kasi. - The worker is watering the plants.

> jan wawa li jo e kiwen suli. - The strong person is carrying big rocks.

> telo suli li jo e kala. - The sea/ocean (big water) has fish.

> mi sitelen e toki sina. - I'm writing down your speech.

> waso lili li moku e pipi. - The small bird eats bugs.

> ma tomo mi li suli. - My city ("housed land") is big.

And here's some sentences that use interesting phrases.

> jan pali li toki utala e tomo mi. - The worker criticizes ("talks in a
> fighting way about") my house.

> ona li toki ike e jan pona mi. - They (insult / speak bad things about) my
> friend(s).

Okay, I will explain one more concept. You can put several verbs and several
objects into one sentence by adding extra particles "li" or "e" followed by
their verbs or objects.

> meli li toki e soweli, e waso. - A woman is talking about land animals and
> birds.

> jan pali li pona e ilo, li lukin e lipu. - A worker fixes the device and looks
> at (reads) a document.

## Dialectal differences

> %info%
> This part of the document describes how certain toki pona courses differ in
> explaining certain ideas.

If the subject is "mi" or "sina" (and therefore it doesn't have a particle
"li"), you can do one of two things to add an extra verb.

* The official book ("pu") suggests that you simply duplicate the sentence:

> mi pali. mi moku. - I work and eat.

* The "o kama sona e toki pona!" course instead suggests you add a second "li":

> mi pali, li moku. - I work and eat.

## Exercises

Now, try to figure out the meaning of these sentences.

* mi moku ala e soweli.
* jan pona sina li toki e ma, e telo.
* jan suli li lukin a ma tomo, li sitelen e ijo.
* ma li jo e kasi ike.
* pipi lili li suli, li pona.

And try to translate the following sentences into toki pona.

* Your city doesn't have any workers.
* My husband doesn't work, (only) eats and fights.
* 
* 
* My friend has fish and fruit and makes good food.

<a name="answers" href="#answers" onclick="revealSpoilers();">Reveal answers</a>

> %spoiler%
> * I don't eat animals (i.e. meat).
> * Your friend is talking about the land and the water.
> * An important person is looking at the city and writing things down.
> * The land has weeds ("bad plants").
> * Small bugs are important and good.

> %spoiler%
> * ma tomo sina li jo ala e jan pali.
> * mije ma li pali ala, li moku, li utala. 
> * 
> * 
> * jan pona mi li jo e kala e kili li pali e moku pona.

[Next page](6.html) [Previous page](4.html)

